hey it's me Destin welcome back to
smarter every day so in the last episode
I explained it's not always the most
athletic team that wins in sports
sometimes it involves the physical
manipulation of objects so sometimes
it's the most intelligent team so today
I'll smarter every day let's take a look
at the physics of curling okay before we
watch some curlers we need to learn the
basics of the sport this is the curling
sheet and the circles are the house the
goal is to get your team's Rock closest
to the button there's four people on
each team the thrower the sweepers in
the Skip who's in charge each team has
eight stones to throw so each person
throws two they alternate with the other
team so there's a total of 16 stones
thrown the very last one is called the
hammer which is a major advantage do you
have any idea how difficult it was to
find a curling stone in Alabama it is
really hard anyway so I know what you're
thinking curling is like the caveman's
for right I'm gonna slide this rock on
ice and I'm gonna hit another rock and
we're just going to try to out Rock each
other but oh no it's way more difficult
than that in fact there's so many things
I had never even considered until I took
a closer look at how this works
for example the simplest question of
them all what makes a curling stone curl
okay let's for example for just a second
that this isn't my coffee table it's
actually a curling sheet so we know from
watching TV that when a player is back
here at the hack which is where they
start and he pushes it toward the house
where you're at which is the bullseye on
the ice as he rotates it's there spins
it counterclockwise it'll curl in the
direction of that rotation right now my
assumption is that has something to do
with this which is called the running
band you'll see the bottom of the
curling stone is concave but there's
this circular frictional interface that
interfaces with the ice so we should be
able to model a circular frictional
interface of a moving sliding object on
a rigid surface right which is this a
glass I'm going to take this circular
object I'm going to put it down on the
low friction surface I'm going to push
it towards you and spin it and expect a
curl in the direction of rotation let's
give it a shot
but I don't see that let's try this
again
set this down push toward you spin it
curl here we go
no it curls in the opposite direction
this is actually what's really confused
scientists for a really long time that
interface of a normal moving sliding
spinning object on a rigid surface the
heat is completely different with normal
objects than it does with a curling
stone there's something magical
happening right here on this running
band between the stone and ice so
clearly the next step is to go find us
some ice
oh I'll whip my pants let's try again
[Music]
so the curling stone goes in the
direction of rotation but the cut goes
opposite which I can understand because
as it's decelerating on the table it's
trying to tip over causing more force on
that leading edge of the cup so when
it's spinning it's pushing against the
table with its leading edge that makes
sense to me let's go to the curling club
in Milwaukee Wisconsin and see if they
can teach us something with prepared ice
and skill most importantly we are at the
Milwaukee curling club we are located at
the fairgrounds and in Ozaukee County
this club is the oldest continuous
curling club the United States before a
game can be played the ice has to be
properly prepared which is a science
within itself if a stone rest on flat
ice it creates a lot of contact friction
which makes the stones run slowly
curlers using the intricate technique
called pibbly to decrease the friction
of the stones on the ice deionized water
that's been purified by reverse osmosis
is sprinkled onto the ice in a very
specific way and allowed to freeze here
you can see J peddling the ice by
swinging a sprinkler nozzle back and
forth you can't imagine the amount of
variables that have to be controlled
during this process number of arm swings
how fast he walks humidity the
difference in height between the tank
and the sprinkler head the temperature
of the water yeah it's pretty crazy
after pedaling they use a blade to knit
the top the pebbles off to create a
smooth uniform running surface because
there's more pressure on the tops of the
pebbles there's more friction melting
which causes less friction which leads
us to sweeping before I research curling
I thought the sweepers were somehow
increasing or decreasing the friction on
one side of the stone or the other and
making it curl I was absolutely wrong
the sweepers actually sweep in order to
heat the ice up and make it curl less if
you throw two stones exactly the same
and you didn't sweep one but you swept
the other you would find that the swept
one would go straighter and farther this
is a scanning electron microscope image
of a pebble on the ice you can see that
it's been nipped on the top so it's
fresh this however is an image of a
pebble after it's been swept you can
plainly see that there's grain
boundaries from where it melted when it
was swept with a broom that thin layer
of water that forms acts as a
lubrication barrier reducing the
friction and allowing the stone
farther and faster so this is where it
gets interesting so we're trying to
figure out why the curling stone curls
right so I look around and I find the
international experts for curling
physics I found a guy in Canada and I
find a team in Sweden and so I start
reading all their papers turns out these
guys are not even close to agreeing it's
really interesting in fact they'd never
even communicated with their voices they
only communicate via technical paper
fascinating I called the guys up on the
phone and I have like an hour and a half
conversation with both groups trying to
understand what exactly is the mechanism
Harald Nyberg at Uppsala University in
Sweden explained something to me called
the scratch theory visualise a stone
rotating and moving down the eyes now
think about the running man and what the
scratches that would make look like as
it goes down the sheet the edges of the
running man would make this really
awesome overlapping pattern as it slides
down the Swedish scientists say that
because the rough spots at the rear of
the band have to hop over the scratches
created by the leading edge of the
running band this will induce a force on
the rear of the stone making it curl in
the direction of rotation they claim to
prove this by showing images of pebbles
that have been scratched at an angle
after the stone slides over them they
also did an experiment by scratching ice
really deeply with sandpaper at two
angles and pushing a stone across the
scratches without rotating it on this
how makes momentum a tonne fully
understand
come hold on
pretty convincing right not so fast dr.
marc chagall ski at the University of
northern British Columbia in Canada once
there is stone with a polished metal
running band which doesn't produce the
same type of scratches he observed that
it curled like a normal stone by
throwing it on freshly pebbled ice
dr. Schakowsky believes that the
mechanism is something called asymmetric
friction melting when the stone travels
over the ice the friction heats up the
ice and melts it creating that
lubrication barrier that we discussed
earlier he believes that there's more
frictional wetting on the front side and
the back due to the rock tending to tip
over
just like the cup did in our earlier
experiment another possibility is that
because the side of the rock that's
advancing moves faster relative to the
ice than the retreating side it could be
creating more lubrication you can
visualize this by looking back at the
difference in the contact patterns this
additional relative motion would create
more frictional heat up on top which
would melt more ice this water could
then be transported forward by the
rotation and lubricate the leading edge
of the band more than the rear edge that
forward tipping of the rock or the water
transport Theory pushes the rock into
the direction of rotation both
scientists are convinced that their
theory is the dominant mechanism taking
place at the back of the running band
but they agree however that more work
still needs to be done personally I
don't think either one of the theories
can stand up to all the questions on its
own I think the ultimate model might be
a combination of both of the theories
dr. Schakowsky believes there may even
be one or two other mechanisms at play
here that would help describe the
mysterious motion of the curling stone
who knows what I do know however is that
the nations that have scientists
researching the physics of curling are
the same nations that most often have
Olympic athletes on the podiums for
curling hey I have a huge announcement
here on my way home from work I'm not
sure if you can tell but these videos
take a lot of time and effort yeah you
can you're smart you know what I'm doing
here you know how there were two
different experts for curling right that
consulted them both to get the best idea
well I've done the same thing for
something else jack conte from patreon
and Hank green co-founder of subbable
have created two different platforms
that content creators like me can use to
try to generate support for what they do
now
the idea is if you enjoy and play some
kind of value on smarter every day that
you can voluntarily you can I'm not
saying dude but you can voluntarily
decide to assist what I do anyway so you
can go to either one of these pages
patreon or subbed well and there's all
kinds of different perks on there
there's ways to reach out to me there's
posters there's all kinds of stuff
infographics so patreon is a per video
model and subbable is a per month model
now I didn't know what would work best
so I contacted both of these guys and
decided to test it for myself to see
which one works the best for smarter
every day anyway you can test them and
see what works best for you anyway I'll
leave links to the patreon and subbable
smartereveryday pages and if you would
be willing to support smarter every day
that would be awesome it would make my
life better because I can streamline my
workflow and probably be a better dad
because I might have a little more time
anyway I'm Destin thank you for even
considering that subbable and patreon
smarter every day I'll leave links here
and in the video description thanks
[Music]
you try this at your house right don't
tell me it physics there's a principle
called the conservation of momentum
so if momentum is mass times velocity
and the curling stones all have the same
mass you can assume that it's velocity
that's conserved for the most part the
forward velocity of the stone just
before impact is going to be equivalent
to the fort velocity in the system just
after impact this works for both the X
direction and the y direction since
there's no sideways velocity before
impact the lateral velocity after the
impacts has to equal out to zero in that
cool
[Music]